docs(appium): add building drivers doc (resolves #16788) (#17050)
appium/appium: packages/appium/docs/en/ecosystem/build-drivers.md

title: Building Appium Drivers
---

Appium wants to make it easy for anyone to develop their own automation drivers as part of the
Appium ecosystem. This guide will explain what's involved and how you can accomplish various driver
development tasks using the tools Appium provides. This guide assumes you (1) are a competent user of
Appium, (2) are a competent Node.js developer, and (3) that you have read and understood the
[Driver Intro](../intro/drivers.md).

If that describes you, great! This guide will get you started.

## Before you create your driver

Before you get to work implementing your driver, it's important to have a few things sorted out.
For example, you need to know what your driver will do. Which platform is it trying to expose
WebDriver automation for?

Appium doesn't magically give you the power to automate any platform. All it does is give you a set

> of convenient tools to make implementing the WebDriver Protocol easy. So if you want to create
> a driver for some new app platform, let's say, you'll need to already know how you would automate
> apps on that platform *without Appium*.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
of convenient tools for implementing the WebDriver Protocol. So if you want to create, for example, 
a driver for a new app platform, you'll need to know how to automate apps on that platform *without Appium*.
```

This usually means that you need to be very familiar with app development for a given platform. And
it usually means that you will rely on tools or SDKs provided by the platform vendor.

> Basically, if you can't answer the question "how would I launch, remotely trigger behaviours, and
> read state from an app on this platform?" then you're not quite ready to write an Appium driver.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Basically, if you can't answer the question **"how would I launch, remotely trigger behaviours, and
read state from an app on this platform?" then you're not quite ready to write an Appium driver**.
```

coding it up and making it available as an Appium driver should be the easy part!

## Other drivers to reference

One of the greatest things about building an Appium driver is that there are already a number of
open source Appium drivers which you can look at for reference. There is
a [fake-driver](https://github.com/appium/appium/tree/2.0/packages/fake-driver) sample driver which
does basically nothing other than showcase some of the things described in this guide.

And of course, all of Appium's official drivers are open source and available in repositories at
the project's GitHub organization. So if you ever find yourself asking, "how does a driver do X?",
read the code for these drivers! Also don't be afraid to ask questions of the Appium developers if
you get stuck; we're always happy to help make sure the driver development experience is a good
one!

## Basic requirements for Appium drivers

These are the things your driver *must* do (or be), if you want it to be a valid Appium driver.

### Node.js package with an Appium manifest

All Appium drivers are fundamentally Node.js packages, and therefore must have a valid

> `package.json`. Your driver is not limited to Node.js, but whatever you do with your driver must
> ultimately be triggered by Node.js.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`package.json`. Your driver is not _limited_ to Node.js, but it must provide an adapter written in Node.js so it can be loaded by Appium.
```

Your `package.json` must include `appium` as a `peerDependency`. The requirements for the
dependency versions should be as loose as possible (unless you happen to know your driver will only
work with certain versions of Appium). For Appium 2.0, for example, this would look something like
`^2.0.0`, declaring that your driver works with any version of Appium that starts with 2.x.

> Your `package.json` must contain an `appium` field, like this (we call this the 'Appium manifest'):

Reviewer: > (we call this the 'Appium manifest')

We do? 😄 

I think we have some convolution of terminology going on (and this is my fault too).  Internally, I've been calling  `extensions.yaml` the "manifest" (Manifest).  The data in the Manifest _which is derived from an extension's `package.json`_ is the "extension metadata".  A Manifest contains records of this extension metadata _and_ internal (computed) metadata for each extension.

If we're going to settle on terminology, no time like the present!

Author: > We do?

aspirationally? i dunno. what should we call this? most specifically, it is "the `appium` field in the extension's package.json`".

I think I'm fine with "Appium extension metadata"?

Reviewer: wfm

Author: ok, renamed it to that.

    ```json

>     {
>         ...,
>         "appium": {
>             "driverName": "fake",
>             "automationName": "Fake",
>             "platformNames": [
>               "Fake"
>             ],
>             "mainClass": "FakeDriver"
>         },
>         ...
>     }

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    {
      ...,
      "appium": {
        "driverName": "fake",
        "automationName": "Fake",
        "platformNames": [
          "Fake"
        ],
        "mainClass": "FakeDriver"
      },
      ...
    }
```

:trollface:

    ```

The required subfields are:

* `driverName`: this should be a short name for your driver.
* `automationName`: this should be the string users will use for their `appium:automationName`
capability to tell Appium to use *your* driver.

> * `platformNames`: this is an array of platform names considered valid for your driver. When a user

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `platformNames`: this is an array of _one or more_ platform names considered valid for your driver. When a user
```

also maybe refer to a list of known platform names? I know a driver author may want to create a new one (or multiple).

sends in the `platformName` capability to start a session, it must be included in this list for
your driver to handle the session.

> * `mainClass`: this is a named export from your `main` field. It must be a class which extends
> Appium's `BaseDriver` (see below).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `mainClass`: this is a named export (in CommonJS style) from your `main` field. It must be a class which extends
Appium's `BaseDriver` (see below).
```

...just to avoid confusion with ESM named exports.  _Or_ we need to be explicit that Appium expects you to compile your ESM to CommonJS.  

We can support native ESM in the future, but that's the way things are now

### Extend Appium's `BaseDriver` class

Ultimately, your driver is much easier to write because most of the hard work of implementing the
WebDriver protocol and handling certain common logic is taken care of already by Appium. This is
all encoded up as a class which Appium exports for you to use, called `BaseDriver`. It is exported
from `appium/driver`, so you can use one of these styles to import it and create your *own* class
that extends it:

```js
import {BaseDriver} from 'appium/driver';
// or: const {BaseDriver} = require('appium/driver');

export class MyDriver extends BaseDriver {
}
```

### Make your driver available

That's basically it! With a Node.js package exporting a driver class and with a correct Appium
manifest, you've got yourself an Appium driver! Now it doesn't *do* anything, but you can load it
up in Appium, start and stop sessions with it, etc...

To make it available to users, you could publish it via NPM. When you do so, your driver will be

> isntallable via the Appium CLI:

Reviewer: Maybe you should have the author `appium driver install --source=local /path/to/your/package` first.

Also typo on `installable`

```
appium driver install --source=npm <driver-package-on-npm>
```

> ### Developing your driver

Reviewer 2: How about installing it from `local` source instead (which is `npm link` under the hood)? This is what I usually do

How you develop your driver is up to you. It is convenient, however, to run it from within Appium
without having to do lots of publishing and installing. The most straightforward way to do this is
to include the most recent version of Appium as a `devDependency`, and then also your own driver,
like this:

```json
{
    "devDependencies": {
        ...,
        "appium": "^2.0.0",
        "your-driver": "file:.",
        ...
    }
}
```

> Now, you can run Appium locally (`npx appium`), and because your driver is listed as a dependency

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now, you can run Appium locally (`npm exec appium` or `npx appium`), and because your driver is listed as a dependency
```

alongside it, it will be automatically "installed" and available. You can design your e2e tests
this way, or if you're writing them in Node.js, you can simply import Appium's start server methods

> to handle starting and stopping the Appium server in Node.

Reviewer: We will probably want to reference the basedriver E2E suite function as well.  This is being moved into `appium/test` in #16907

## Standard driver implementation ideas

These are things you will probably find yourself wanting to do when creating a driver.

### Set up state in a constructor

If you define your own constructor, you'll need to call `super` to make sure all the standard state
is set up correctly:

```js

> constructor(opts) {

Reviewer: we may want to mention what `opts` is

    super(opts);
    // now do your own thing
}
```

### Define and validate accepted capabilities

You can define your own capabilities and basic validation for them. Users will always be able to
send in capabilities that you don't define, but if they send in capabilities you have explicitly
defined, then Appium will validate that they are of the correct type (and will check for the
presence of required capabilities).

If you want to turn capability validation off entirely, set `this.shouldValidateCaps` to `false` in
your constructor.

> To give Appium your validation constraints, set `this.desiredCapConstraints` to a validation object

Reviewer: ugh, need schemas.

Author: yeah, want to make another schema system lol?

Reviewer: luckily I can reuse a ton of it.  

should get done, but less of a high priority and more of a "fun" thing for me

in your constructor. Validation objects can be somewhat complex. Here's an example from the
UiAutomator2 driver:

```js
{
  app: {
    presence: true,
    isString: true
  },
  automationName: {
    isString: true
  },
  browserName: {
    isString: true
  },
  launchTimeout: {
    isNumber: true
  },
}
```

### Start a session and read capabilities

Appium's `BaseDriver` already implements the `createSession` command, so you don't have to. However
it's very common to need to perform your own startup actions (launching an app, running some
platform code, or doing different things based on capabilities you have defined for your driver).
So you'll probably end up overriding `createSession`. You can do so by defining the method in your
driver:

```js

> async createSession(jwpCaps, reqCaps, w3cCaps, otherDriverData) {

Reviewer 2: this is now different and all the first 3 params are assumed to be be `w3cCaps`

Reviewer 2: maybe not everything was cut off. Basically the code there just checks which of these three arguments is a valid w3c caps one (starting from the last one) and accepts it or throws an exception if none is found. My point was we probably don't want to do a breaking change to all drivers and also don't wan't to expose legacy jwp support.

Author: yeah. i think all the info is still there from the client, but now it doesn't matter which one comes in which position as long as a w3c object is in there. but it does mean driver authors have to be careful when they are calling `super`, for example, not to send in 3 copies of the jwp style one

    const [sessionId, caps] = super.createSession(w3cCaps);
    // do your own stuff here
    return [sessionId, caps];
}
```

> For legacy reasons, your function will receive old-style JSON Wire Protocol desired and required

Reviewer: I'm not sure this is true?  IIRC those first two args are always `undefined`.  We really should sort this out.

Reviewer 2: I'm sure this is not true anymore. We simply cut off lagacy caps

Author: we should test this. i was using a client (webdriverio) that i think sends both styles of caps, and I got a value for the first parameter. i needed to use the 3rd param for it to work.

Reviewer: we should probably just rip off the bandaid here and accept one w3c caps arg.

caps as the first two arguments. Given that the old protocol isn't supported anymore and clients
have all been updated, you can instead only rely on the `w3cCaps` parameter. (For a discussion
about what `otherDriverData` is about, see the section below on concurrent drivers).

You'll want to make sure to call `super.createSession` in order to get the session ID as well as
the processed capabilities (note that capabilities are also set on `this.caps`; modifying `caps`
locally here would have no effect other than changing what the user sees in the create session
response).

So that's it! You can fill out the middle section with whatever startup logic your driver requires.

### End a session

> If your driver requires any cleanup or shutdown logic, it's best to do it as part of overriding the

Reviewer 2: it is probably important to mention one has to be careful about throwing exceptions in this method call as we usually want all session deletion steps to be executed before existing the method. So it must be designed in the way that each api call there is error-proof.

You handle WebDriver commands by implementing functions in your driver class. Each member of the
WebDriver Protocol, plus the various Appium extensions, has a corresponding function that you
implement if you want to support that command in your driver. The best way to see which commands
Appium supports and which method you need to implement for each command is to look at Appium's
[routes.js](https://github.com/appium/appium/blob/2.0/packages/base-driver/lib/protocol/routes.js).
Each route object in this file tells you the command name as well as the parameters you'd expect to
receive for that command.

Let's take this block for example:
```js
'/session/:sessionId/url': {
    GET: {command: 'getUrl'},
    POST: {command: 'setUrl', payloadParams: {required: ['url']}},
}
```

Here we see that the route `/session/:sessionId/url` is mapped to two commands, one for a `GET`
request and one for a `POST` request. If we want to allow our driver to change the "url" (or
whatever that might mean for our driver), we can therefore implement the `setUrl` command, knowing
it will take the `url` parameter:

```
async setUrl(url) {
    // your implementation here
}
```

A few notes:

> - all commands should be `async` functions

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- all "command" methods must `async` functions or otherwise return a `Promise`
```

- you don't need to worry about protocol encoding/decoding. You will get JS objects as params, and

>   can return JS objects in response. Appium will take care of wrapping it up in the WebDriver

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  can return JSON-serializable JS objects in response. Appium will take care of wrapping it up in the WebDriver
```

  protocol response format, turning it into JSON, etc...
- all session-based commands receive the `sessionId` parameter as the last parameter
- all element-based commands receive the `elementId` parameter as the second-to-last parameter
- if your driver doesn't implement a command, users can still try to access the command, and will
  get a `501 Not Yet Implemented` response error.

### Implement element finding

Element finding is a special command implementation case. You don't actually want to override
`findElement` or `findElements`, even though those are what are listed in `routes.js`. Appium does
a lot of work for you if instead you implement this function:

```
async findElOrEls(strategy, selector, mult, context) {
    // find your element here
}
```

Here's what gets passed in:

> - `strategy` - a string, the locator strategy being used

Reviewer: May want to list the default valid strategies

- `selector` - a string, the selector
- `mult` - boolean, whether the user has requested one element or all elements matching the
  selector
- `context` - (optional) if defined, will be a W3C Element (i.e., a JS object with the W3C element
  identifier as the key and the element ID as the value)

And you need to return one of the following:

- a single W3C element (an object as described above)
- an array of W3C elements

Note that you can import that W3C web element identifier from `appium/support`:

```js
import {util} from 'appium/support';
const { W3C_WEB_ELEMENT_IDENTIFIER } = util;
```

> What you do with elements is up to you! Usually you end up keeping a cache map of IDs to actual

Reviewer 2: should we also mention the set of standard errors we have to map w3c error codes?

Reviewer 3: Sounds good idea

Author: yeah, will add

element "objects" or whatever the equivalent is for your platform.

### Define valid locator strategies

Your driver might only support a subset of the standard WebDriver locator strategies, or it might
add its own custom locator strategies. To tell Appium which strategies are considered valid for
your driver, create an array of strategies and assign it to `this.locatorStrategies`:

```js
this.locatorStrategies = ['xpath', 'custom-strategy'];
```

Appium will throw an error if the user attempts to use any strategies other than the allowed ones,
which enables you to keep your element finding code clean and deal with only the strategies you
know about.

### Log messages to the Appium log

You can always use `console.log`, of course, but Appium provides a nice logger for you as
`this.log` (it has `.info`, `.debug`, `.log`, `.warn`, `.error` methods on it for differing log
levels). If you want to create an Appium logger outside of a driver context (say in a script or
helper file), you can always construct your own too:

```js
import {logging} from 'appium/support';

> const log = logging.getLogger('MyDriver');

Reviewer 2: this has been changed. Each driver now receives its own `log` property, which also automatically contains unique driver fingerpint and the session identifier, which greatly helps to parse server logs coming from multiple drivers.
This log property could also be passed to JWProxy

Author: yeah, i mention that just above. these lines are in case you are outside of a driver context and have no access to `this.log`

```json
{
    "scripts": {
        "prebuild": "./scripts/driver-prebuild.js"
    }
}
```

Now, assuming your driver is named `mydriver`, users of your driver can run `appium driver run
mydriver prebuild`, and your script will execute.

### Proxy commands to another WebDriver implementation

A very common design architecture for Appium drivers is to have some kind of platform-specific
WebDriver implementation that the Appium driver interfaces with. For example, the Appium
UiAutomator2 driver interfaces with a special (Java-based) server running on the Android device. In
webview mode, it also interfaces with Chromedriver.

If you find yourself in this situation, it is extremely easy to tell Appium that your driver is
just going to be proxying WebDriver commands straight to another endpoint.

First, let Appium know that your driver *can* proxy by implementing the `canProxy` method:

```
canProxy() {
    return true;
}
```

Next, tell Appium which WebDriver routes it should *not* attempt to proxy (there often end up being
certain routes that you don't want to forward on):

```
getProxyAvoidList() {
    return [
        ['POST', new RegExp('^/session/[^/]+/appium')]
    ];
}
```

> The proxy avoidance list should be an array of arrays, where each inner array has an HTTP method as

Reviewer: seems like this ought to support a different data structure someday

Author: 👍

its first member, and a regular expression as its second. If the regular expression matches the
route, then the route will not be proxied and instead will be handled by your driver. In this
example, we are avoiding proxying all `POST` routes that have the `appium` prefix.

Next, we have to set up the proxying itself. The way to do this is to use a special class from

> Appium called `JWProxy`. You'll want to create a `JWProxy` object using the details required to

Reviewer: What does JW stand for?

Author: it's legacy. I'll make a note. we could also export an alias of it as `WDProxy` maybe?

Reviewer: I'd be happy with `WebDriverProxy`

Author: https://github.com/appium/appium/issues/17061

connect to the remote server:

```js
// import {JWProxy} from 'appium/driver';

const proxy = new JWProxy({

>     server: 'remote.server',

Reviewer 2: I would describe all possible options

Author: ideally this would be generated by API documentation and linked to here. this document is supposed to be a guide, not exhaustive API docs

    port: 1234,
    base: '/',
});

this.proxyReqRes = proxy.proxyReqRes.bind(proxy);
this.proxyCommand = proxy.command.bind(proxy);
```

Here we are creating a proxy object and assigning some of its methods to `this` under the names

> `proxyReqRes` and `proxyCommand`. This is required for Appium to use the proxy, so don't forget

Reviewer: We could make this more ergonomic

this step! The `JWProxy` has a variety of other options which you can check out in the source code,
as well.

Finally, we need a way to tell Appium when the proxy is active. For your driver it might always
be active, or it might only be active when in a certain context. You can define the logic as an
implementation of `proxyActive`:

```js
proxyActive() {
    return true; // or use custom logic
}
```

With those pieces in play, you won't have to reimplement anything that's already implemented by the
remote endpoint you're proxying to. Appium will take care of all the proxying for you.

### Extend the existing protocol with new commands

You may find that the existing commands don't cut it for your driver. If you want to expose
behaviours that don't map to any of the existing commands, you can create new commands in one of
two ways:

> 1. Extending the WebDriver protocol and creating client-side plugins to access the extensions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Extending the WebDriver protocol and creating client-side plugins to access the extensions
```

> 1. Overloading the Execute Script command

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Overloading the "Execute Script" command
```

If you want to follow the first path, you can direct Appium to recognize new methods and add them
to its set of allowed HTTP routes and command names. You do this by assigning the `newMethodMap`
static variable in your driver class to an object of the same form as Appium's `routes.js` object.

> For example, here is the `newMethodMap` for the FakeDriver example driver:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, here is the `newMethodMap` for the `FakeDriver` example driver:
```

An alternative to this way of doing things is to overload a command which all WebDriver clients
have access to already: Execute Script. A common driver pattern is to create a magic prefix which
the driver looks for at the beginning of any Execute Script invocation, and if it's present, to
treat the rest of the script string as the name of a custom command to execute. This works in large
part because for most platforms beyond web browsers, executing arbitrary JavaScript isn't a thing
that makes sense.

Let's say you are building a driver for stereo system called `soundz`, and you wanted to create
a command for playing a song by name. You could expose this to your users in such a way that they
call something like:

```js
// webdriverio example
driver.executeScript('soundz: playSong', [{song: 'Stairway to Heaven', artist: 'Led Zeppelin'}]);
```

Then in your driver code you could simply look for `soundz:` at the beginning of your
`execute` override, and do the appropriate thing:

```js
async execute(script, args) {
  if (script === 'soundz: playSong') {
    const {song, artist} = args[0];
    // play the song based on song and artist details
    return;
  }

>   // otherwise do the normal thing, or throw a not yet implemented

Reviewer 2: I'd add a more concrete example on what exception to throw and where to import it

}
```

### Implement handling of Appium settings

Appium users can send parameters to your driver via CLI args as well as via capabilities. But these
cannot change during the course of a test, and sometimes users want to adjust parameters mid-test.
Appium has a [Settings](../guides/settings.md) API for this purpose.

> To support settings in your own driver, first of all define `this.settings` to be an instance of

Reviewer: Why don't we do this by default?

Reviewer: ah, okay. 

in that case it seems like it'd make sense--in a utopian future where the API is perfect--to just have a function or property which defines the defaults, and the thing that instantiates `DeviceSettings` could just use it. (similarly to other things here)

Author: agreed.

the appropriate class, in your constructor:

```js
// import {DeviceSettings} from 'appium/driver';

this.settings = new DeviceSettings();
```

Now, you can read user settings any time simply by calling `this.settings.getSettings()`. This will
return a JS object where the settings names are keys and have their corresponding values.

If you want to assign some default settings, or run some code on your end whenever settings are
updated, you can do both of these things as well.

```js
constructor() {
  const defaults = {setting1: 'value1'};
  this.settings = new DeviceSettings(defaults, this.onSettingsUpdate.bind(this));
}

> async onSettingsUpdate(key, value) {

Reviewer: I wonder if this should work more like a standard EE

  // do anything you want here with key and value
}
```

### Make itself aware of resources other concurrent drivers are using

Let's say your driver uses up some system resources, like ports. There are a few ways to make sure
that multiple simultaneous sessions don't use the same resources:

1. Have your users specify resource IDs via capabilities (`appium:driverPort` etc)
1. Just always use free resources (find a new random port for each session)

> 1. Have each driver express what resources it is using, then examine currently-used resources from

Reviewer 2: this strategy is only going to work if drivers are triggered in scope of a single server. If a common system resource is being used by drivers running on the same machine but under different server processes then armageddon is guaranteed. In such case the usage of inter-process locks (for example file-based ones) could only be helpful.

   other drivers when a new session begins.

> To support this third strategy, you can implement `get driverData` in your driver to return what

Reviewer: I wonder why this is a computed property and not a function, like many of the others

Author: there is a mix of when we use properties and when we use functions. it's not pretty.

sorts of resources your driver is currently using, for example:

```
get driverData() {
  return {specialPort: 1234, specialFile: /path/to/file}
}
```

Now, when a new session is started on your driver, the `driverData` response from any other
simultaneously running drivers will also be included, as the last parameter of the `createSession`
method:

```
async createSession(jwpCaps, reqCaps, w3cCaps, driverData)
```

You can dig into this `driverData` array to see what resources other drivers are using to help

> determine which ones you want to use for this particular session.

Reviewer: I think I was a little confused about this, and I'm not sure what would be an accurate suggestion, but this seems to mean "instances of other drivers", and naturally those are per-session, and may an instance of your driver or some other driver

Author: actually it's just drivers of this driver's type. i'll add a note.

### Log events to the Appium event timeline

> Appium has an [Event Timing API](../guides/event-timing.md) which allows users to get timestamps for

Reviewer: expanding a little on the use case here would be helpful

certain server-side events (like commands, startup milestones, etc...) and display them on
a timeline. You can add your own events to the event log:

```js
this.logEvent(name);
```

Simply provide a name for the event and it will be added at the current time, and made accessible
as part of the event log for users.

### Hide behaviour behind security flags

Appium has a feature-flag based [security model](../guides/security.md) that allows driver authors
to hide certain features behind security flags. What this means is that if you have a feature you
deem insecure and want to require server admins to opt in to it, you can require that they enable
the feature by adding it to the `--allow-insecure` list or turning off server security entirely.

To support the check within your own driver, you can call `this.isFeatureEnabled(featureName)` to
determine whether a feature of the given name has been enabled. Or, if you want to simply
short-circuit and throw an error if the feature isn't enabled, you can call

> `this.ensureFeatureEnabled(featureName)`.

Reviewer: we should rename this to `assertFeatureEnabled()` :wink:

### Use a temp dir for files

If you want to use a temporary directory for files your driver creates that are not important to

> keep around between computer or server restarts, you can simply read from `this.opts.tmpDir`.

Reviewer: Is this a string? does it reference a temp dir that already exists? how can the user control when it's cleaned up? what is an example use-case?

Reviewer 2: the idea behind this is that one could provide a path to this dir from a server command line arg and then clean it safely up from the client code after the server process gets killed.

Reviewer 2: this is also the main reason to prefer using tmpDir module from `@appium/support` instead of directly using ones provided by Node.

### Deal with unexpected shutdowns or crashes

Your driver might run into a situation where it can't continue operating normally. For example, it
might detect that some external service has crashed and nothing will work anymore. In this case, it
can call `this.startUnexpectedShutdown(err)` with an error object including any details, and Appium
will attempt to gracefully handle any remaining requests before shutting down the session.

If you want to perform some of your own cleanup logic when you encounter this condition, you can
either do so immediately before calling `this.startUnexpectedShutdown`, or you can attach a handler
to the unexpected shutdown event and run your cleanup logic "out of band" so to speak:

```js

> this.onUnexpectedShutdown(handler)

Reviewer: what does `handler` receive?
